[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For far too long, we have
looked upon the various organs
in the body as existing
separately and not interrelated
at all.
It's a Descartes kind
of machine-based idea
about how the body works.
But now, we know that seemingly
disparate parts of the body,
like the gut and the brain, are
actually intimately related.
The gut is influencing
the brain constantly.
And truly, what comes
out of the brain
influences how the gut works.
And that comes
from, for example,
the various
microorganisms that live
within the gut and the various
chemicals that they produce,
as well as direct connections
of the gut to the brain.
We're just beginning to gain an
understanding as to how intimate
that relationship really
is, from an evolutionary
perspective, and how our
modern world is reflected
on that relationship as well.
[CALM MUSIC PLAYING]
We know, for example, that
depression is primarily
an inflammatory disease.
As such, we can begin
to look at depression
and lump it into
other categories
like cardiovascular
disease, certainly
senile dementia of the
Alzheimer's type, type II
diabetes, obesity, overweight.
These are all primarily
inflammatory disorders.
When we recognize then that
depression, for example,
is primarily inflammatory,
it explains to us
a lot of things--
why people who have
underlying
gastrointestinal issues
are far more prone
to inflammation
and, therefore, depression.
So this notion that depression
is so highly influenced
by inflammation and inflammation
can have its genesis in the gut,
really begins to
open the door for us
to think that we can leverage
interventions related to the gut
to have an outcome that
can relate to mood.
[CALM MUSIC PLAYING]
Alzheimer's is fundamentally
an inflammatory disorder
of the brain and clearly
is related to disturbances
in the gut bacteria.
So as we try to
explore and understand
this relationship between the
gut bacteria and something far
apart, the brain and how
the brain is functioning
and how the brain may be
resistant to developing
Alzheimer's or may be at
risk for Alzheimer's, it's
a bit of a stretch
for a lot of people.
We tended to, again, want to
compartmentalize body parts,
but the reality is that
what is going on in the gut
is influencing every
part of the body.
And as it relates to that
fundamental mechanism called
inflammation, probably,
there's no organ
in the body that is much as
sensitive to inflammation
as is the brain.
So to connect two
very important dots,
our brain health, our
risk for Alzheimer's, is
very much dependent upon
the health, functionality,
and diversity of
our gut bacteria.
And once we get our arms
around that understanding,
then we have a
platform from which
we can understand things
like, for example,
the dramatic increase risk of
developing Alzheimer's in people
who are aggressively toxifying
their gut by taking drugs,
for example, like
proton pump inhibitors.
These acid-blocking drugs that
people seem to think they need
to be taking have a dramatic,
damaging effect upon the gut
bacteria and are dramatically
associated with an increased
risk for the development of a
disease for which we have no
pharmaceutical treatment
called Alzheimer's.
Now affecting some
six million Americans,
costing us close to
$500 billion annually,
being related by the drugs that
are popularized on television
and social media that
we seem to think we
need to take at any given time.
[CALM MUSIC PLAYING]
And let me tell you one
more interesting thing
about these proton pump
inhibiting drugs that, again,
are available over the counter,
that everybody thinks if they
can't tolerate the sausage
sandwich, they need to take,
and therefore, they
can eat crappy food.
I mean, that's the
messaging that we get.
And new research
demonstrates that there
is a pretty robust increase in
the body of a chemical called
uric acid.
Well, we now recognize that uric
acid is profoundly inflammatory
in the human body, compromises
mitochondrial function--
that's not a good thing--
and is related to significant
issues in the brain.
One recent study looked at 1,600
people and followed them for 12
years.
And at the beginning
of the study,
they simply measured
the uric acid levels
and then followed these
people for 12 years.
And about every two years, they
would do a cognitive assessment
of these individuals.
And what they found after the
12-year study done in Japan was
that those individuals who had
a higher level of uric acid
at the very beginning of the
study were found to have about
an 80% increased risk
of developing dementia,
a 55% increased risk of
developing full-blown
Alzheimer's disease, and a 166%
increased risk of developing
what is called vascular
or mixed dementia.
The point being that
uric acid-- getting back
to our discussion on the proton
pump inhibitors and so many
of the things are
involved with uric acid.
But elevated uric acid
is bad for the brain.
[CALM MUSIC PLAYING]
Normal function of the
brain, and disease resistance
being very important,
are intimately
dependent upon the health
of the gut every minute
of every single day.
And this relationship
is established at birth.
It is established by birth
method, as an example.
We know that children
born by cesarean section
don't have the benefit of
passing through the birth canal
and being anointed, if you will,
by a certain set of bacteria
in the birth canal,
that then are
the seeds for the development
of that child's gut microbiome.
When a child is
born by c-section,
it has some very significant
lifelong consequences
that I think are very
valuable to understand.
First and foremost is
the type of bacteria
that seed that child's newly
forming microbiome are the ones
that he or she acquires
from the operating
room at the time of being
delivered by c-section.
And what we see is a
significant increased risk
of immune-related issues in
children born by c-section.
Higher levels of autoimmunity,
much higher levels of risk as it
relates to developing type
I or autoimmune diabetes,
celiac disease, also an
autoimmune condition, autism,
and as much as a
three-fold increased
risk of developing attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder.
These are issues that we have
to be paying attention to
from the moment of
birth, even as it relates
to the type of delivery.
So the discussion with
future mom and dad,
whether they do
c-section or not,
needs to go a lot further
from simply a discussion
of convenience and how large
my scar might be, and really
understand that a third
of American births
right now is done by c-section.
Let's be clear.
There is absolutely time and
place for cesarean section.
But I think it's quite evident
that it's being overused
for reasons that
I've just described.
And I think it's
valuable for parents
to know that there are some
significant downstream risks,
lifelong, that can accompany
being born by that method.
[CALM MUSIC PLAYING]
I recall one patient several
years ago, a young man,
who developed a pretty
aggressive movement disorder.
And I actually videotaped
him, presented him
at various conferences.
And he had a history of really
aggressive antibiotic exposure.
Clearly, his gut
was in disarray.
He was having all kinds
of gut-related issues
when I saw him.
And we actually
treated this young man
by taking away
something from his gut
that was leading to issues
in the gut with respect
to inflammation, increased
gut permeability.
And what we ended up doing for
him was taking out a chemical
called gluten.
Who knew?
Gluten is very disruptive
in many people,
not just in people
with celiac disease.
But there's a large
segment of our population
who has what has been
called non-celiac gluten
sensitivity, described in the
Journal of the American Medical
Association.
I think it's so
valuable to understand
that we have such a
powerful tool in our toolbox
that's largely been
ignored, as it relates
to keeping the brain able
to do what our brains need
to do so we can
involve ourselves
day-to-day in our worlds, and
that is pay attention to what's
going on in the gut.
Specifically, it relates to
the health of our gut bacteria.
Anything that can
threaten the gut bacteria
will ultimately
play out in terms
of threatening a person's
ability to cognitively
participate in life.
So we've got to be very
careful about the drugs
that we take, the foods that we
choose to consume, and recognize
that these gut bacteria
are holding our brain
function in their little hands.
[CALM MUSIC PLAYING]
Gluten, specifically, the
alpha-gliadin part of gluten,
causes gut permeability.
That's the big issue here.